Gemini CLI is designed for any task that requires working with local files and
requires working with local files and multiple tools. In this lesson, you'll
multiple tools. In this lesson, you'll see how Gemini CLI works under the hood.
see how Gemini CLI works under the hood. You'll also learn why working from the
You'll also learn why working from the command line gives you powerful
command line gives you powerful advantages over web interfaces. I hope
advantages over web interfaces. I hope this lesson will spark ideas about
this lesson will spark ideas about what's possible with Gemini CLI. Let's
what's possible with Gemini CLI. Let's dive in. So, throughout this course, we
dive in. So, throughout this course, we are going to go over different use cases
are going to go over different use cases where you can use Gemini CLI to your
where you can use Gemini CLI to your advantage. And it's quite vast what
advantage. And it's quite vast what Gemini CLI can do. You can do it for
Gemini CLI can do. You can do it for software development. You can have it
software development. You can have it implement features. You can actually
implement features. You can actually have it review code as a GitHub action
have it review code as a GitHub action in a CI/CD pipeline. You can also use
in a CI/CD pipeline. You can also use Gemini CLI for content creation. So,
Gemini CLI for content creation. So, we're going to show you how you can
we're going to show you how you can actually take a podcast, break it up
actually take a podcast, break it up into shorts, and generate content for
into shorts, and generate content for social media. And we'll use some really
social media. And we'll use some really cool technologies such as Nano Banana.
cool technologies such as Nano Banana. Gemini CLI can also be used for data
Gemini CLI can also be used for data analysis. Later in this course, we are
analysis. Later in this course, we are going to take quite a large data set of
going to take quite a large data set of CSV files and actually have Gemini CLI
CSV files and actually have Gemini CLI go ahead and process it. It's going to
go ahead and process it. It's going to clean the data and then we're going to
clean the data and then we're going to have it generate some really nice
have it generate some really nice visualization dashboards for us. We're
visualization dashboards for us. We're also going to show how you can actually
also going to show how you can actually use Gemini CLI as a study buddy. We'll
use Gemini CLI as a study buddy. We'll have Gemini CLI go over course notes for
have Gemini CLI go over course notes for us, build summaries, and then build
us, build summaries, and then build interactive tests to help us make sure
interactive tests to help us make sure we're ready to go and have learned the
we're ready to go and have learned the material. So now what you've come here
material. So now what you've come here for, what is Gemini CLI? Gemini CLI is
for, what is Gemini CLI? Gemini CLI is an agent that lives in the terminal.
an agent that lives in the terminal. This means you can easily install it.
This means you can easily install it. It's very lightweight. You can just
It's very lightweight. You can just prompt and ask questions and the agent
prompt and ask questions and the agent will go off, do research on your behalf.
will go off, do research on your behalf. It'll find the files it needs to access
It'll find the files it needs to access and read the contents and then use that
and read the contents and then use that to give you a really clear response.
to give you a really clear response. It's a conversational AI agent at heart
It's a conversational AI agent at heart and it's meant to be an interactive
and it's meant to be an interactive assistant. You're supposed to go back
assistant. You're supposed to go back and forth with [clears throat] the agent
and forth with [clears throat] the agent to help you accomplish and perform the
to help you accomplish and perform the tasks you need. So, as we mentioned,
tasks you need. So, as we mentioned, Gemini CLI is open source. The community
Gemini CLI is open source. The community helps drive a lot of the feature
helps drive a lot of the feature development. You can actually go and
development. You can actually go and inspect every single line of code and it
inspect every single line of code and it means you can actually go ahead and
means you can actually go ahead and customize. You can fork the code, add in
customize. You can fork the code, add in your own features, or create your own
your own features, or create your own version of Gemini CLI. And finally, the
version of Gemini CLI. And finally, the name kind of gives it away, but it is
name kind of gives it away, but it is powered and backed by Gemini models. The
powered and backed by Gemini models. The free tier actually comes with a very
free tier actually comes with a very generous amount of requests. so that you
generous amount of requests. so that you can actually use this tool absolutely
can actually use this tool absolutely free of charge for your daily work. So
free of charge for your daily work. So let's take a step back and look under
let's take a step back and look under the hood of Gemini CLI so we know how it
the hood of Gemini CLI so we know how it actually works. You send a prompt. This
actually works. You send a prompt. This is sent to a large language model, the
is sent to a large language model, the Gemini models, and it does the reasoning
Gemini models, and it does the reasoning to understand what tools it needs. If it
to understand what tools it needs. If it needs to process any information, if it
needs to process any information, if it needs to request follow-up information
needs to request follow-up information from you, the user, then it's going to
from you, the user, then it's going to go ahead and actually call the tools in
go ahead and actually call the tools in order to generate the proper response.
order to generate the proper response. And it can go through this process
And it can go through this process multiple times. So it can iterate
multiple times. So it can iterate through calling different tools, getting
through calling different tools, getting different information sent to it and
different information sent to it and doing the reasoning on it until it is
doing the reasoning on it until it is satisfied with the response before it
satisfied with the response before it sends it back to you. This is really
sends it back to you. This is really powerful because it means Gemini CLI can
powerful because it means Gemini CLI can run for extended periods of time doing
run for extended periods of time doing reasoning and looping through different
reasoning and looping through different tool calls in order to build out entire
tool calls in order to build out entire applications or debug really tricky
applications or debug really tricky issues on your behalf so that you can
issues on your behalf so that you can spend time doing what you do best and
spend time doing what you do best and building. So let's take a look at the
building. So let's take a look at the actual advantages of using a terminal
actual advantages of using a terminal agent. The main one being that has
agent. The main one being that has direct access to your file system. So
direct access to your file system. So all of the files on your machine, Gemini
all of the files on your machine, Gemini CLI can go and read the ones it needs to
CLI can go and read the ones it needs to help answer your questions. This helps
help answer your questions. This helps it be contextaware. This makes it very
it be contextaware. This makes it very conversational and makes it feel like a
conversational and makes it feel like a partner in a task. Another one of the
partner in a task. Another one of the key advantages to a terminal based agent
key advantages to a terminal based agent like Gemini CLI is that is really a
like Gemini CLI is that is really a Swiss Army knife of tools. anything you
Swiss Army knife of tools. anything you have installed on your local computer,
have installed on your local computer, Gemini CLI's access to it can actually
Gemini CLI's access to it can actually go out and install things for you. So,
go out and install things for you. So, for instance, if you're deploying an
for instance, if you're deploying an application or you want to check logs of
application or you want to check logs of a deployed service, you can actually
a deployed service, you can actually have Gemini CLI use G-Cloud to go ahead
have Gemini CLI use G-Cloud to go ahead and pull those logs in. This really
and pull those logs in. This really helps you stop context switching because
helps you stop context switching because Gemini CLI can install the tools and
Gemini CLI can install the tools and execute them on your behalf. Some use
execute them on your behalf. Some use cases where this comes in handy,
cases where this comes in handy, automation and scripting. instead of
automation and scripting. instead of having to go learn about how to do
having to go learn about how to do something, you can actually have Gemini
something, you can actually have Gemini CLI just build a script and then it can
CLI just build a script and then it can run it for you. One of the advantages of
run it for you. One of the advantages of Gemini CLI is also its vast extensions
Gemini CLI is also its vast extensions ecosystem. And this really helps Gemini
ecosystem. And this really helps Gemini CLI become fully customized so that any
CLI become fully customized so that any task you're trying to complete can be
task you're trying to complete can be done through adding on extensions, MCP
done through adding on extensions, MCP servers or custom commands. At a base
servers or custom commands. At a base layer, Gemini CLI comes with a bunch of
layer, Gemini CLI comes with a bunch of built-in tools. These are file systems
built-in tools. These are file systems tools. List the directories, read files,
tools. List the directories, read files, write to files, do search and edits.
write to files, do search and edits. Another cool capability of Gemini CLI is
Another cool capability of Gemini CLI is that it actually has a web search tool.
that it actually has a web search tool. This is really helpful when Gemini CLI
This is really helpful when Gemini CLI needs access to things that maybe were
needs access to things that maybe were just released or there was things in the
just released or there was things in the news. You want it to do some research on
news. You want it to do some research on fresh data that it wasn't trained on. As
fresh data that it wasn't trained on. As we mentioned, it also has shell tools.
we mentioned, it also has shell tools. So, it can run any single application on
So, it can run any single application on your machine through shell commands. So
your machine through shell commands. So if you have GitHub CLI, it will go ahead
if you have GitHub CLI, it will go ahead and actually run a shell command to
and actually run a shell command to execute GitHub CLI and put up that pull
execute GitHub CLI and put up that pull request for you. There's also other
request for you. There's also other tools such as the ability to save memory
tools such as the ability to save memory so that when you use Gemini CLI often,
so that when you use Gemini CLI often, it can remember certain pieces of how
it can remember certain pieces of how you like to customize your workflow or
you like to customize your workflow or certain details that you don't want to
certain details that you don't want to have to repeat on every single session.
have to repeat on every single session. So, now that we've gone over the use
So, now that we've gone over the use cases and the tools for Gemini CLI and
cases and the tools for Gemini CLI and why it can be versatile, let's actually
why it can be versatile, let's actually show it off and get it installed on our
show it off and get it installed on our machines so that we can get going.